# The Future of Data Systems

## Unbundling Databases
At a most abstract level, databases, Hadoop, and operating systems all perform the same functions: they store some data, and they allow you to process and query that data. A database stores data in records of some data model (rows in tables, docu‐ ments, vertices in a graph, etc.) while an operating system’s filesystem stores data in files—but at their core, both are “information management” systems. As we saw in Chapter 10, the Hadoop ecosystem is somewhat like a distributed version of Unix.

Of course, there are many practical differences. For example, many filesystems do not cope very well with a directory containing 10 million small files, whereas a database containing 10 million small records is completely normal and unremarkable. Never‐ theless, the similarities and differences between operating systems and databases are worth exploring.

Unix and relational databases have approached the information management prob‐ lem with very different philosophies. Unix viewed its purpose as presenting program‐ mers with a logical but fairly low-level hardware abstraction, whereas relational databases wanted to give application programmers a high-level abstraction that would hide the complexities of data structures on disk, concurrency, crash recovery, and so on. Unix developed pipes and files that are just sequences of bytes, whereas databases developed SQL and transactions.

Which approach is better? Of course, it depends what you want. Unix is “simpler” in the sense that it is a fairly thin wrapper around hardware resources; relational data‐ bases are “simpler” in the sense that a short declarative query can draw on a lot of powerful infrastructure (query optimization, indexes, join methods, concurrency control, replication, etc.) without the author of the query needing to understand the implementation details.

The tension between these philosophies has lasted for decades (both Unix and the relational model emerged in the early 1970s) and still isn’t resolved. For example, I would interpret the NoSQL movement as wanting to apply a Unix-esque approach of low-level abstractions to the domain of distributed OLTP data storage.

In this section I will attempt to reconcile the two philosophies, in the hope that we can combine the best of both worlds.

### Composing Data Storage Technologies
Over the course of this book we have discussed various features provided by data‐ bases and how they work, including:
* Secondary indexes, which allow you to efficiently search for records based on the value of a field (see “Other Indexing Structures” on page 85)
* Materialized views, which are a kind of precomputed cache of query results (see
“Aggregation: Data Cubes and Materialized Views” on page 101)
* Replication logs, which keep copies of the data on other nodes up to date (see
“Implementation of Replication Logs” on page 158)
* Full-text search indexes, which allow keyword search in text (see “Full-text search and fuzzy indexes” on page 88) and which are built into some relational databases
In Chapters 10 and 11, similar themes emerged. We talked about building full-text search indexes (see “The Output of Batch Workflows” on page 411), about material‐ ized view maintenance (see “Maintaining materialized views” on page 467), and about replicating changes from a database to derived data systems (see “Change Data Capture” on page 454).

It seems that there are parallels between the features that are built into databases and the derived data systems that people are building with batch and stream processors.

#### Creating an index
Think about what happens when you run CREATE INDEX to create a new index in a relational database. The database has to scan over a consistent snapshot of a table, pick out all of the field values being indexed, sort them, and write out the index. Then it must process the backlog of writes that have been made since the consistent snap‐ shot was taken (assuming the table was not locked while creating the index, so writes could continue). Once that is done, the database must continue to keep the index up to date whenever a transaction writes to the table.

This process is remarkably similar to setting up a new follower replica (see “Setting Up New Followers” on page 155), and also very similar to bootstrapping change data capture in a streaming system (see “Initial snapshot” on page 455).

Whenever you run CREATE INDEX, the database essentially reprocesses the existing dataset (as discussed in “Reprocessing data for application evolution” on page 496) and derives the index as a new view onto the existing data. The existing data may be a snapshot of the state rather than a log of all changes that ever happened, but the two are closely related (see “State, Streams, and Immutability” on page 459).

#### The meta-database of everything
In this light, I think that the dataflow across an entire organization starts looking like one huge database. Whenever a batch, stream, or ETL process transports data from one place and form to another place and form, it is acting like the database sub‐ system that keeps indexes or materialized views up to date.

Viewed like this, batch and stream processors are like elaborate implementations of triggers, stored procedures, and materialized view maintenance routines. The derived data systems they maintain are like different index types. For example, a relational database may support B-tree indexes, hash indexes, spatial indexes (see “Multi- column indexes” on page 87), and other types of indexes. In the emerging architec‐ ture of derived data systems, instead of implementing those facilities as features of a single integrated database product, they are provided by various different pieces of software, running on different machines, administered by different teams.

Where will these developments take us in the future? If we start from the premise that there is no single data model or storage format that is suitable for all access pat‐ terns, I speculate that there are two avenues by which different storage and process‐ ing tools can nevertheless be composed into a cohesive system:
* Federated databases: unifying reads - It is possible to provide a unified query interface to a wide variety of underlying storage engines and processing methods—an approach known as a federated database or polystore 19]. For example, PostgreSQL’s foreign data wrapper feature fits this pattern. Applications that need a specialized data model or query interface can still access the underlying storage engines directly, while users who want to combine data from disparate places can do so easily through the federated interface.
  * A federated query interface follows the relational tradition of a single integrated system with a high-level query language and elegant semantics, but a compli‐ cated implementation.
* Unbundled databases: unifying writes - While federation addresses read-only querying across several different systems, it does not have a good answer to synchronizing writes across those systems. We said that within a single database, creating a consistent index is a built-in feature. When we compose several storage systems, we similarly need to ensure that all data changes end up in all the right places, even in the face of faults. Making it easier to reliably plug together storage systems (e.g., through change data capture and event logs) is like unbundling a database’s index-maintenance features in a way that can synchronize writes across disparate technologies
  * The unbundled approach follows the Unix tradition of small tools that do one thing well, that communicate through a uniform low-level API (pipes), and that can be composed using a higher-level language (the shell).

#### Making unbundling work
Federation and unbundling are two sides of the same coin: composing a reliable, scal‐ able, and maintainable system out of diverse components. Federated read-only querying requires mapping one data model into another, which takes some thought but is ultimately quite a manageable problem. I think that keeping the writes to sev‐ eral storage systems in sync is the harder engineering problem, and so I will focus on it.

The traditional approach to synchronizing writes requires distributed transactions across heterogeneous storage systems, which I think is the wrong solution (see “Derived data versus distributed transactions” on page 492). Transactions within a single storage or stream processing system are feasible, but when data crosses the boundary between different technologies, I believe that an asynchronous event log with idempotent writes is a much more robust and practical approach.

For example, distributed transactions are used within some stream processors to ach‐ ieve exactly-once semantics (see “Atomic commit revisited” on page 477), and this can work quite well. However, when a transaction would need to involve systems written by different groups of people (e.g., when data is written from a stream pro‐ cessor to a distributed key-value store or search index), the lack of a standardized transaction protocol makes integration much harder. An ordered log of events with idempotent consumers (see “Idempotence” on page 478) is a much simpler abstrac‐ tion, and thus much more feasible to implement across heterogeneous systems.

The big advantage of log-based integration is loose coupling between the various com‐ ponents, which manifests itself in two ways:
1. At a system level, asynchronous event streams make the system as a whole more robust to outages or performance degradation of individual components. If a consumer runs slow or fails, the event log can buffer messages (see “Disk space usage” on page 450), allowing the producer and any other consumers to continue running unaffected. The faulty consumer can catch up when it is fixed, so it doesn’t miss any data, and the fault is contained. By contrast, the synchronous interaction of distributed transactions tends to escalate local faults into large- scale failures (see “Limitations of distributed transactions” on page 363).
2. At a human level, unbundling data systems allows different software components and services to be developed, improved, and maintained independently from each other by different teams. Specialization allows each team to focus on doing one thing well, with well-defined interfaces to other teams’ systems. Event logs provide an interface that is powerful enough to capture fairly strong consistency properties (due to durability and ordering of events), but also general enough to be applicable to almost any kind of data.

#### Unbundled versus integrated systems
If unbundling does indeed become the way of the future, it will not replace databases in their current form—they will still be needed as much as ever. Databases are still required for maintaining state in stream processors, and in order to serve queries for the output of batch and stream processors (see “The Output of Batch Workflows” on page 411 and “Processing Streams” on page 464). Specialized query engines will con‐ tinue to be important for particular workloads: for example, query engines in MPP data warehouses are optimized for exploratory analytic queries and handle this kind of workload very well (see “Comparing Hadoop to Distributed Databases” on page 414).

The complexity of running several different pieces of infrastructure can be a problem: each piece of software has a learning curve, configuration issues, and operational quirks, and so it is worth deploying as few moving parts as possible. A single integra‐ ted software product may also be able to achieve better and more predictable perfor‐ mance on the kinds of workloads for which it is designed, compared to a system consisting of several tools that you have composed with application code. As I said in the Preface, building for scale that you don’t need is wasted effort and may lock you into an inflexible design. In effect, it is a form of premature optimization.

The goal of unbundling is not to compete with individual databases on performance for particular workloads; the goal is to allow you to combine several different data‐ bases in order to achieve good performance for a much wider range of workloads than is possible with a single piece of software. It’s about breadth, not depth—in the same vein as the diversity of storage and processing models that we discussed in “Comparing Hadoop to Distributed Databases” on page 414.

Thus, if there is a single technology that does everything you need, you’re most likely best off simply using that product rather than trying to reimplement it yourself from lower-level components. The advantages of unbundling and composition only come into the picture when there is no single piece of software that satisfies all your requirements.

#### What’s missing?
The tools for composing data systems are getting better, but I think one major part is missing: we don’t yet have the unbundled-database equivalent of the Unix shell (i.e., a high-level language for composing storage and processing systems in a simple and declarative way).

For example, I would love it if we could simply declare mysql | elasticsearch, by analogy to Unix pipes, which would be the unbundled equivalent of CREATE INDEX: it would take all the documents in a MySQL database and index them in an Elasticsearch cluster. It would then continually capture all the changes made to the database and automatically apply them to the search index, without us having to write custom application code. This kind of integration should be possible with almost any kind of storage or indexing system.

Similarly, it would be great to be able to precompute and update caches more easily. Recall that a materialized view is essentially a precomputed cache, so you could imag‐ ine creating a cache by declaratively specifying materialized views for complex quer‐ ies, including recursive queries on graphs (see “Graph-Like Data Models” on page 49) and application logic. There is interesting early-stage research in this area, such as differential dataflow, and I hope that these ideas will find their way into production systems.

### Designing Applications Around Dataflow
The approach of unbundling databases by composing specialized storage and pro‐ cessing systems with application code is also becoming known as the “database inside-out” approach, after the title of a conference talk I gave in 2014. However, calling it a “new architecture” is too grandiose. I see it more as a design pattern, a starting point for discussion, and we give it a name simply so that we can better talk about it.

These ideas are not mine; they are simply an amalgamation of other people’s ideas from which I think we should learn. In particular, there is a lot of overlap with data‐ flow languages such as Oz and Juttle, functional reactive programming (FRP) languages such as Elm, and logic programming languages such as Bloom. The term unbundling in this context was proposed by Jay Kreps.

Even spreadsheets have dataflow programming capabilities that are miles ahead of most mainstream programming languages. In a spreadsheet, you can put a for‐ mula in one cell (for example, the sum of cells in another column), and whenever any input to the formula changes, the result of the formula is automatically recalculated. This is exactly what we want at a data system level: when a record in a database changes, we want any index for that record to be automatically updated, and any cached views or aggregations that depend on the record to be automatically refreshed. You should not have to worry about the technical details of how this refresh happens, but be able to simply trust that it works correctly.

Thus, I think that most data systems still have something to learn from the features that VisiCalc already had in 1979 [34]. The difference from spreadsheets is that today’s data systems need to be fault-tolerant, scalable, and store data durably. They also need to be able to integrate disparate technologies written by different groups of people over time, and reuse existing libraries and services: it is unrealistic to expect all software to be developed using one particular language, framework, or tool.

In this section I will expand on these ideas and explore some ways of building appli‐ cations around the ideas of unbundled databases and dataflow.

#### Application code as a derivation function
When one dataset is derived from another, it goes through some kind of transforma‐ tion function. For example:
* A secondary index is a kind of derived dataset with a straightforward transforma‐ tion function: for each row or document in the base table, it picks out the values in the columns or fields being indexed, and sorts by those values (assuming a B- tree or SSTable index, which are sorted by key, as discussed in Chapter 3).
* A full-text search index is created by applying various natural language process‐ ing functions such as language detection, word segmentation, stemming or lem‐ matization, spelling correction, and synonym identification, followed by building a data structure for efficient lookups (such as an inverted index).
* In a machine learning system, we can consider the model as being derived from the training data by applying various feature extraction and statistical analysis functions. When the model is applied to new input data, the output of the model is derived from the input and the model (and hence, indirectly, from the training data).
* A cache often contains an aggregation of data in the form in which it is going to be displayed in a user interface (UI). Populating the cache thus requires knowl‐ edge of what fields are referenced in the UI; changes in the UI may require updating the definition of how the cache is populated and rebuilding the cache.

The derivation function for a secondary index is so commonly required that it is built into many databases as a core feature, and you can invoke it by merely saying CREATE INDEX. For full-text indexing, basic linguistic features for common languages may be built into a database, but the more sophisticated features often require domain- specific tuning. In machine learning, feature engineering is notoriously application- specific, and often has to incorporate detailed knowledge about the user interaction and deployment of an application.

When the function that creates a derived dataset is not a standard cookie-cutter func‐ tion like creating a secondary index, custom code is required to handle the application-specific aspects. And this custom code is where many databases struggle. Although relational databases commonly support triggers, stored procedures, and user-defined functions, which can be used to execute application code within the database, they have been somewhat of an afterthought in database design (see “Transmitting Event Streams” on page 440).

#### Separation of application code and state
In theory, databases could be deployment environments for arbitrary application code, like an operating system. However, in practice they have turned out to be poorly suited for this purpose. They do not fit well with the requirements of modern application development, such as dependency and package management, version control, rolling upgrades, evolvability, monitoring, metrics, calls to network services, and integration with external systems.

On the other hand, deployment and cluster management tools such as Mesos, YARN, Docker, Kubernetes, and others are designed specifically for the purpose of running application code. By focusing on doing one thing well, they are able to do it much better than a database that provides execution of user-defined functions as one of its many features.

I think it makes sense to have some parts of a system that specialize in durable data storage, and other parts that specialize in running application code. The two can interact while still remaining independent.

Most web applications today are deployed as stateless services, in which any user request can be routed to any application server, and the server forgets everything about the request once it has sent the response. This style of deployment is conve‐ nient, as servers can be added or removed at will, but the state has to go somewhere: typically, a database. The trend has been to keep stateless application logic separate from state management (databases): not putting application logic in the database and not putting persistent state in the application. As people in the functional programming community like to joke, “We believe in the separation of Church and state”.

In this typical web application model, the database acts as a kind of mutable shared variable that can be accessed synchronously over the network. The application can read and update the variable, and the database takes care of making it durable, pro‐ viding some concurrency control and fault tolerance.

However, in most programming languages you cannot subscribe to changes in a mutable variable—you can only read it periodically. Unlike in a spreadsheet, readers of the variable don’t get notified if the value of the variable changes. (You can imple‐ ment such notifications in your own code—this is known as the observer pattern— but most languages do not have this pattern as a built-in feature.)

Databases have inherited this passive approach to mutable data: if you want to find out whether the content of the database has changed, often your only option is to poll (i.e., to repeat your query periodically). Subscribing to changes is only just beginning to emerge as a feature (see “API support for change streams” on page 456).

#### Dataflow: Interplay between state changes and application code
Thinking about applications in terms of dataflow implies renegotiating the relation‐ ship between application code and state management. Instead of treating a database as a passive variable that is manipulated by the application, we think much more about the interplay and collaboration between state, state changes, and code that pro‐ cesses them. Application code responds to state changes in one place by triggering state changes in another place.

We saw this line of thinking in “Databases and Streams” on page 451, where we discussed treating the log of changes to a database as a stream of events that we can sub‐ scribe to. Message-passing systems such as actors (see “Message-Passing Dataflow” on page 136) also have this concept of responding to events. Already in the 1980s, the tuple spaces model explored expressing distributed computations in terms of pro‐ cesses that observe state changes and react to them.

As discussed, similar things happen inside a database when a trigger fires due to a data change, or when a secondary index is updated to reflect a change in the table being indexed. Unbundling the database means taking this idea and applying it to the creation of derived datasets outside of the primary database: caches, full-text search indexes, machine learning, or analytics systems. We can use stream processing and messaging systems for this purpose.

The important thing to keep in mind is that maintaining derived data is not the same as asynchronous job execution, for which messaging systems are traditionally designed (see “Logs compared to traditional messaging” on page 448):
* When maintaining derived data, the order of state changes is often important (if several views are derived from an event log, they need to process the events in the same order so that they remain consistent with each other). As discussed in “Acknowledgments and redelivery” on page 445, many message brokers do not have this property when redelivering unacknowledged messages. Dual writes are also ruled out (see “Keeping Systems in Sync” on page 452).
* Fault tolerance is key for derived data: losing just a single message causes the derived dataset to go permanently out of sync with its data source. Both message delivery and derived state updates must be reliable. For example, many actor sys‐ tems by default maintain actor state and messages in memory, so they are lost if the machine running the actor crashes.

Stable message ordering and fault-tolerant message processing are quite stringent demands, but they are much less expensive and more operationally robust than dis‐ tributed transactions. Modern stream processors can provide these ordering and reli‐ ability guarantees at scale, and they allow application code to be run as stream operators.

This application code can do the arbitrary processing that built-in derivation func‐ tions in databases generally don’t provide. Like Unix tools chained by pipes, stream operators can be composed to build large systems around dataflow. Each operator takes streams of state changes as input, and produces other streams of state changes as output.

#### Stream processors and services
The currently trendy style of application development involves breaking down func‐ tionality into a set of services that communicate via synchronous network requests such as REST APIs (see “Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC” on page 131). The advantage of such a service-oriented architecture over a single monolithic application is primarily organizational scalability through loose coupling: different teams can work on different services, which reduces coordination effort between teams (as long as the services can be deployed and updated independently).

Composing stream operators into dataflow systems has a lot of similar characteristics to the microservices approach. However, the underlying communication mecha‐ nism is very different: one-directional, asynchronous message streams rather than synchronous request/response interactions.

Besides the advantages listed in “Message-Passing Dataflow” on page 136, such as better fault tolerance, dataflow systems can also achieve better performance. For example, say a customer is purchasing an item that is priced in one currency but paid for in another currency. In order to perform the currency conversion, you need to know the current exchange rate. This operation could be implemented in two ways [40, 41]:
1. In the microservices approach, the code that processes the purchase would prob‐ ably query an exchange-rate service or database in order to obtain the current rate for a particular currency.
2. In the dataflow approach, the code that processes purchases would subscribe to a stream of exchange rate updates ahead of time, and record the current rate in a local database whenever it changes. When it comes to processing the purchase, it only needs to query the local database.

The second approach has replaced a synchronous network request to another service with a query to a local database (which may be on the same machine, even in the same process). Not only is the dataflow approach faster, but it is also more robust to the failure of another service. The fastest and most reliable network request is no net‐ work request at all! Instead of RPC, we now have a stream join between purchase events and exchange rate update events (see “Stream-table join (stream enrichment)” on page 473).

The join is time-dependent: if the purchase events are reprocessed at a later point in time, the exchange rate will have changed. If you want to reconstruct the original out‐ put, you will need to obtain the historical exchange rate at the original time of pur‐ chase. No matter whether you query a service or subscribe to a stream of exchange rate updates, you will need to handle this time dependence (see “Time-dependence of joins” on page 475).

Subscribing to a stream of changes, rather than querying the current state when needed, brings us closer to a spreadsheet-like model of computation: when some piece of data changes, any derived data that depends on it can swiftly be updated. There are still many open questions, for example around issues like time-dependent joins, but I believe that building applications around dataflow ideas is a very promis‐ ing direction to go in.

### Observing Derived State
At an abstract level, the dataflow systems discussed in the last section give you a pro‐ cess for creating derived datasets (such as search indexes, materialized views, and predictive models) and keeping them up to date. Let’s call that process the write path: whenever some piece of information is written to the system, it may go through mul‐ tiple stages of batch and stream processing, and eventually every derived dataset is updated to incorporate the data that was written.

But why do you create the derived dataset in the first place? Most likely because you want to query it again at a later time. This is the read path: when serving a user request you read from the derived dataset, perhaps perform some more processing on the results, and construct the response to the user.

Taken together, the write path and the read path encompass the whole journey of the data, from the point where it is collected to the point where it is consumed (probably by another human). The write path is the portion of the journey that is precomputed —i.e., that is done eagerly as soon as the data comes in, regardless of whether anyone has asked to see it. The read path is the portion of the journey that only happens when someone asks for it. If you are familiar with functional programming lan‐ guages, you might notice that the write path is similar to eager evaluation, and the read path is similar to lazy evaluation.

The derived dataset is the place where the write path and the read path meet. It represents a trade-off between the amount of work that needs to be done at write time and the amount that needs to be done at read time.

#### Materialized views and caching
A full-text search index is a good example: the write path updates the index, and the read path searches the index for keywords. Both reads and writes need to do some work. Writes need to update the index entries for all terms that appear in the docu‐ ment. Reads need to search for each of the words in the query, and apply Boolean logic to find documents that contain all of the words in the query (an AND operator), or any synonym of each of the words (an OR operator).

If you didn’t have an index, a search query would have to scan over all documents (like grep), which would get very expensive if you had a large number of documents. No index means less work on the write path (no index to update), but a lot more work on the read path.

On the other hand, you could imagine precomputing the search results for all possible queries. In that case, you would have less work to do on the read path: no Boolean logic, just find the results for your query and return them. However, the write path would be a lot more expensive: the set of possible search queries that could be asked is infinite, and thus precomputing all possible search results would require infinite time and storage space. That wouldn’t work so well.

Another option would be to precompute the search results for only a fixed set of the most common queries, so that they can be served quickly without having to go to the index. The uncommon queries can still be served from the index. This would generally be called a cache of common queries, although we could also call it a materialized view, as it would need to be updated when new documents appear that should be included in the results of one of the common queries.

From this example we can see that an index is not the only possible boundary between the write path and the read path. Caching of common search results is possi‐ ble, and grep-like scanning without the index is also possible on a small number of documents. Viewed like this, the role of caches, indexes, and materialized views is simple: they shift the boundary between the read path and the write path. They allow us to do more work on the write path, by precomputing results, in order to save effort on the read path.

Shifting the boundary between work done on the write path and the read path was in fact the topic of the Twitter example at the beginning of this book, in “Describing Load” on page 11. In that example, we also saw how the boundary between write path and read path might be drawn differently for celebrities compared to ordinary users. After 500 pages we have come full circle!

#### Stateful, offline-capable clients
I find the idea of a boundary between write and read paths interesting because we can discuss shifting that boundary and explore what that shift means in practical terms. Let’s look at the idea in a different context.

The huge popularity of web applications in the last two decades has led us to certain assumptions about application development that are easy to take for granted. In par‐ ticular, the client/server model—in which clients are largely stateless and servers have the authority over data—is so common that we almost forget that anything else exists. However, technology keeps moving on, and I think it is important to question the status quo from time to time.

Traditionally, web browsers have been stateless clients that can only do useful things when you have an internet connection (just about the only thing you could do offline was to scroll up and down in a page that you had previously loaded while online). However, recent “single-page” JavaScript web apps have gained a lot of stateful capa‐ bilities, including client-side user interface interaction and persistent local storage in the web browser. Mobile apps can similarly store a lot of state on the device and don’t require a round-trip to the server for most user interactions.

These changing capabilities have led to a renewed interest in offline-first applications that do as much as possible using a local database on the same device, without requir‐ ing an internet connection, and sync with remote servers in the background when a network connection is available. Since mobile devices often have slow and unre‐ liable cellular internet connections, it’s a big advantage for users if their user interface does not have to wait for synchronous network requests, and if apps mostly work off‐ line (see “Clients with offline operation” on page 170).

When we move away from the assumption of stateless clients talking to a central database and toward state that is maintained on end-user devices, a world of new opportunities opens up. In particular, we can think of the on-device state as a cache of state on the server. The pixels on the screen are a materialized view onto model objects in the client app; the model objects are a local replica of state in a remote datacenter.

#### Pushing state changes to clients
In a typical web page, if you load the page in a web browser and the data subse‐ quently changes on the server, the browser does not find out about the change until you reload the page. The browser only reads the data at one point in time, assuming that it is static—it does not subscribe to updates from the server. Thus, the state on the device is a stale cache that is not updated unless you explicitly poll for changes. (HTTP-based feed subscription protocols like RSS are really just a basic form of poll‐ ing.)

More recent protocols have moved beyond the basic request/response pattern of HTTP: server-sent events (the EventSource API) and WebSockets provide communi‐ cation channels by which a web browser can keep an open TCP connection to a server, and the server can actively push messages to the browser as long as it remains connected. This provides an opportunity for the server to actively inform the end- user client about any changes to the state it has stored locally, reducing the staleness of the client-side state.

In terms of our model of write path and read path, actively pushing state changes all the way to client devices means extending the write path all the way to the end user. When a client is first initialized, it would still need to use a read path to get its initial state, but thereafter it could rely on a stream of state changes sent by the server. The ideas we discussed around stream processing and messaging are not restricted to run‐ ning only in a datacenter: we can take the ideas further, and extend them all the way to end-user devices.

The devices will be offline some of the time, and unable to receive any notifications of state changes from the server during that time. But we already solved that problem: in “Consumer offsets” on page 449 we discussed how a consumer of a log-based mes‐ sage broker can reconnect after failing or becoming disconnected, and ensure that it doesn’t miss any messages that arrived while it was disconnected. The same techni‐ que works for individual users, where each device is a small subscriber to a small stream of events.

#### End-to-end event streams
Recent tools for developing stateful clients and user interfaces, such as the Elm lan‐ guage and Facebook’s toolchain of React, Flux, and Redux, already manage internal client-side state by subscribing to a stream of events representing user input or responses from a server, structured similarly to event sourcing (see “Event Sourc‐ ing” on page 457).

It would be very natural to extend this programming model to also allow a server to push state-change events into this client-side event pipeline. Thus, state changes could flow through an end-to-end write path: from the interaction on one device that triggers a state change, via event logs and through several derived data systems and stream processors, all the way to the user interface of a person observing the state on another device. These state changes could be propagated with fairly low delay—say, under one second end to end.

Some applications, such as instant messaging and online games, already have such a “real-time” architecture (in the sense of interactions with low delay, not in the sense of “Response time guarantees” on page 298). But why don’t we build all applications this way?

The challenge is that the assumption of stateless clients and request/response interac‐ tions is very deeply ingrained in our databases, libraries, frameworks, and protocols. Many datastores support read and write operations where a request returns one response, but much fewer provide an ability to subscribe to changes—i.e., a request that returns a stream of responses over time (see “API support for change streams” on page 456).

In order to extend the write path all the way to the end user, we would need to funda‐ mentally rethink the way we build many of these systems: moving away from request/ response interaction and toward publish/subscribe dataflow. I think that the advantages of more responsive user interfaces and better offline support would make it worth the effort. If you are designing data systems, I hope that you will keep in mind the option of subscribing to changes, not just querying the current state.

#### Reads are events too
We discussed that when a stream processor writes derived data to a store (database, cache, or index), and when user requests query that store, the store acts as the bound‐ ary between the write path and the read path. The store allows random-access read queries to the data that would otherwise require scanning the whole event log.

In many cases, the data storage is separate from the streaming system. But recall that stream processors also need to maintain state to perform aggregations and joins (see “Stream Joins” on page 472). This state is normally hidden inside the stream pro‐ cessor, but some frameworks allow it to also be queried by outside clients, turn‐ ing the stream processor itself into a kind of simple database.

I would like to take that idea further. As discussed so far, the writes to the store go through an event log, while reads are transient network requests that go directly to the nodes that store the data being queried. This is a reasonable design, but not the only possible one. It is also possible to represent read requests as streams of events, and send both the read events and the write events through a stream processor; the processor responds to read events by emitting the result of the read to an output stream.

When both the writes and the reads are represented as events, and routed to the same stream operator in order to be handled, we are in fact performing a stream-table join between the stream of read queries and the database. The read event needs to be sent to the database partition holding the data (see “Request Routing” on page 214), just like batch and stream processors need to copartition inputs on the same key when joining (see “Reduce-Side Joins and Grouping” on page 403).

This correspondence between serving requests and performing joins is quite fundamental. A one-off read request just passes the request through the join operator and then immediately forgets it; a subscribe request is a persistent join with past and future events on the other side of the join.

Recording a log of read events potentially also has benefits with regard to tracking causal dependencies and data provenance across a system: it would allow you to reconstruct what the user saw before they made a particular decision. For example, in an online shop, it is likely that the predicted shipping date and the inventory status shown to a customer affect whether they choose to buy an item. To analyze this connection, you need to record the result of the user’s query of the shipping and inventory status.

Writing read events to durable storage thus enables better tracking of causal depen‐ dencies (see “Ordering events to capture causality” on page 493), but it incurs addi‐ tional storage and I/O cost. Optimizing such systems to reduce the overhead is still an open research problem. But if you already log read requests for operational purposes, as a side effect of request processing, it is not such a great change to make the log the source of the requests instead.

#### Multi-partition data processing
For queries that only touch a single partition, the effort of sending queries through a stream and collecting a stream of responses is perhaps overkill. However, this idea opens the possibility of distributed execution of complex queries that need to com‐ bine data from several partitions, taking advantage of the infrastructure for message routing, partitioning, and joining that is already provided by stream processors.

Storm’s distributed RPC feature supports this usage pattern (see “Message passing and RPC” on page 468). For example, it has been used to compute the number of people who have seen a URL on Twitter—i.e., the union of the follower sets of every‐ one who has tweeted that URL. As the set of Twitter users is partitioned, this computation requires combining results from many partitions.

Another example of this pattern occurs in fraud prevention: in order to assess the risk of whether a particular purchase event is fraudulent, you can examine the reputation scores of the user’s IP address, email address, billing address, shipping address, and so on. Each of these reputation databases is itself partitioned, and so collecting the scores for a particular purchase event requires a sequence of joins with differently partitioned datasets.

The internal query execution graphs of MPP databases have similar characteristics (see “Comparing Hadoop to Distributed Databases” on page 414). If you need to per‐ form this kind of multi-partition join, it is probably simpler to use a database that provides this feature than to implement it using a stream processor. However, treat‐ ing queries as streams provides an option for implementing large-scale applications that run against the limits of conventional off-the-shelf solutions.
